CRDT protocol serialization v1 (#169)
decentraland/adr: content/ADR-167-crdt-protocol-serialization.md

---

> adr: 167

Reviewer: Should it be 169?

title: CRDT protocol v1
date: 2022-05-09

> status: Living

Reviewer: What about this status?

type: Standards Track
spdx-license: CC0-1.0
authors:
  - leanmendoza
  - menduz
---

## Abstract

> This ADR intents to modify ADR-117 serialization, while the ADR-166 intents to modify the ADR-117 CRDT specification.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This ADR intends to modify ADR-117 serialization, while the ADR-166 aims to change the ADR-117 CRDT specification.
```

## Context, Reach & Prioritization

<!--
Discuss and go into detail about the subject in question. Make sure you cover:
- Why is this decision important
- The urgency of the decision
- Datapoints and related background information
- Vocabulary and key terms
-->

> After the entity aproach beside the ADR-166, the current serialization and a new operation has been changed.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After the entity approach, besides the ADR-166, the current serialization and a new operation have been changed.  
```

## Definition and serialization

> The protocol keeps planed, for fast serialization. In this way, the `c++` struct has to be understood as contiguos:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The protocol keeps planned for fast serialization. In this way, the `c++` struct has to be understood as contiguous:
```

```cpp
enum class CrdtMessageType: uint32_t {
  PUT_COMPONENT = 1,
  DELETE_COMPONENT = 2,
  DELETE_ENTITY = 3
};

struct CrdtMessageHeader {
  uint32_t length;
  CrdtMessageType type;
};

union Entity {
  uint32_t id;
  struct {
    uint16_t version;
    uint16_t number;
  } d;
}

struct PutComponentMessageBody {
  // key
  Entity entity;
  uint32_t componentId;
  // timestamp
  uint32_t lamport_timestamp;

  uint32_t data_length;

  // ... bytes[] with data_length size
};

struct DeleteComponentMessageBody {
  // key
  Entity entity;
  uint32_t componentId;
  // timestamp
  uint32_t lamport_timestamp;
};

struct DeleteEntityMessageBody {
  Entity entity;
};
```

The changes are: 

> - `entity` is now an union, but still 32bit number. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `entity` is now a union, but still a 32-bit number.
```

> - `timestamp` is now 32bit number instead of 64bit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `timestamp` is now a 32-bit number instead of 64-bit
```

> -  `data_length` is not longer in the `DeleteComponentMessage`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-  `data_length` is no longer in the `DeleteComponentMessage`
```

### Entity

> Dividing the 32 bit number into two 16 bit numbers: one for `entity-number` and one for `entity-version`. The `entity-version` will be the higher part, so the `entity-number` the lower part:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dividing the 32-bit number into two 16-bit numbers: one for `entity-number` and one for `entity-version`. The `entity-version` will be the higher part, so the `entity-number` the lower one:
```

`[31..16][15..0] = [entity-version][entity-number]`

The functions to compound or uncompound (in typescript):
```ts
const MAX_U16 = 0xffff
const MASK_UPPER_16_ON_32 = 0xff00

function fromEntityId(entityId: number) {
  return {
    number: (entity & MAX_U16) >>> 0,
    version: (((entity & MASK_UPPER_16_ON_32) >> 16) & MAX_U16) >>> 0
  }
}

function toEntityId(
  entityNumber: number,
  entityVersion: number
): Entity {
  return ((entityNumber & MAX_U16) | ((entityVersion & MAX_U16) << 16)) >>> 0
}
```

> The limits are imposed by the range of the numbers. Each entity can have up to 65536 versions, and each scene can have up to 65536 simultaneously entities.

Author: thanks for the review!
